The Muslims were left stranded following the death of Prophet Idris. Since, no other man from amongst them was chosen as a Prophet, people began to look to the pious companions of Idris for guidance. They respected and followed these righteous men and consulted them every time they were faced with a problem. Eventually, as time passed by, the pious men also had passed away leaving the Muslims again with no leader for guidance. They feared and were worried that they would stray from the path of Allah.

Satan who watched on with shrewd eyes, approached the wailing men and women, disguised as a man, whispered in to their ears: “If we make statues of these righteous men, it will be more pleasing to us in our worship and will remind us of them.” The men agreed as they perceived no harm in erecting statues of their most pious men, that would surely help them remember Allah and encourage them to do good.

Satan had successfully planted his corrupt seed. He was patient for he knew that getting man to worship another was a slow process. When that generation had passed and the new generation of people had forgotten the intention behind the erecting of statues, Satan whispered into the ears of the men: “Your forefathers used to worship these idols. These statues brought them goodness.”

Thus, idolatry took root in the hearts of man.

Centuries passed, and Allah decided to send a Prophet to guide the idolaters back to the truth. The prophet chosen for this sacred task was Nuh (Noah). Allah blessed his loyal disciple with eloquent speech and immense patience so that he may carry out his duty with success. So Prophet Nuh began to preach to his people about the mysteries of the vast universe—he informed them about the night and the day, the stars and the moon, the plants and animals, and the heavens and the earth. He explained to them that man was created by Allah to glorify and worship Him. Nuh then told them about the oneness of Allah—that the mysteries of the world were only proof of the existence of one true God and that is none other than Allah the Most High. He explained to them that Satan had misled them into worshiping idols and warned them of a terrible punishment from Allah if they continued their idol worship.

The People of Prophet Nuh listened to him with great confusion and patience. The most miserable and desperate amongst Nuh’s people began to find hope and solace in the Prophet’s words and gradually entered into the fold of Islam, whilst the affluent watched on with rage. They said to Nuh: “We see you but a man like ourselves”. Prophet Nuh explained to them that he was certainly a human being and Allah had specifically chosen a human messenger as the earth was predominantly occupied by humans after all. And if the earth was occupied by angels, Allah would have surely sent an angelic messenger to convey his message.

One day, the wealthy masters of the city approached Prophet Nuh and said to him: “Listen Nuh, if you want us to believe in you, then dismiss your believers. They are meek and poor, while we are elite and rich; no faith can include us both.” Nuh was well-aware of the ignorance of the wealthy men. He knew that he had to remain calm in order to explain to them that materialistic possessions were worthless in the sight of Allah and it was what is within one’s heart that really mattered to Him. Prophet Nuh replied to them: “O my people! I ask for no wealth for it, my reward is from none but Allah. I am not going to drive away those who have believed. Surely, they are going to meet their Lord, but I see that you are ignorant people. O my people! Who will help me against Allah, if I drove them away? Will you not then give a thought? And I do not say to you that with me are the Treasures of Allah nor that I know the unseen, nor do I say that I am an angel, and I do not say of those whom your eyes look down upon that Allah will not bestow any good on them. Allah knows what is in their inner selves. In that case, I should, indeed be one of the wrongdoers.”

The idolaters were furious. They had tolerated Nuh’s incessant preaching and arguments for far too long. They angrily challenged Nuh: “O Nuh! You have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us, now bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you are of the truthful.” Nuh replied: “Only Allah will bring the punishment on you, if He wills, and then you will not be able to escape. And my advice will not profit you, even if I wish to give you counsel, if Allah’s Will is to keep you astray. He is your Lord! And to Him you shall return.”

The disbelievers, who had lost all patience with Nuh, resorted to hurl insults at the Messenger of Allah in attempt to frighten him from preaching the religion of Islam. They said: “Verily, we see you in plain error”. Nuh patiently replied: “O my people! There is no error in me, but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds! I convey unto you the Messages of my Lord and give sincere advice to you. And I know from Allah what you know not.”

Despite the continuous mockery and rejection, Prophet Nuh was persistent in calling his people to Islam for nine hundred and fifty years. But every generation that came to existence rejected Nuh as their fathers did. Each child that reached an age of understanding was clearly warned against the teachings of Prophet Nuh. Whenever the Prophet approached them they ran away from him. They found every excuse to escape from the presence of Nuh. Before long, Prophet Nuh realized that the number of disbelievers were rapidly on the rise, whilst the number of believers remained unchanged. He was very upset for his people and feared a terrible predicament for them, but he was left with no choice.

So Prophet Nuh prayed to Allah: “My Lord! They have disobeyed me, and followed one whose wealth and children give them no increase but only loss. They have plotted a mighty plot. They have said: ‘you shall not leave your gods, nor shall you leave Wadd, Suwa, Yaghuth, Ya’uq, nor Nasr (names of the idols)’. Indeed they have led many astray. O Allah! Grant no increase to the disbelievers.”

Allah soon revealed to Prophet Nuh that no other man from his people would enter Islam thereafter. Sad and frustrated, Prophet Nuh replied to Allah: “My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth. If you leave them, they will mislead Your slaves and they will beget none but wicked disbelievers.” Prophet Nuh’s prayer was accepted by his Lord. He instructed Prophet Nuh: “And construct the ark under Our Eyes and with Our Inspiration and address Me not on behalf of those who did wrong.”