Khursheed Kamal Aziz, popularly known as KK Aziz, was a historian in Pakistan. He received his early education from the MB High School in Batala, now in Indian Punjab, and then went to Forman Christian College and finally to Government College Lahore for graduation where one of his professors was the famed Patras Bokhari. Later he completed his studies at Victoria University in Manchester, UK.

Aziz taught at various institutions such as the University of Cambridge and University of Oxford, UK, and at universities in Heidelberg, Germany as well as in Khartoum, Sudan and the Punjab University in Lahore, Pakistan. He also delivered occasional lectures at universities in Pakistan: Karachi, Peshawar, Islamabad; Bangladesh: Dacca; United Kingdom: Hull, New Castle upon Tyne and Oxford; Switzerland: Geneva and Bergen.

He worked briefly, in the early 1970s, as an advisor to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and was the chairman of the 'National Commission on Historical and Cultural Research'. But he later fell out with the Bhutto government and left that position. Some years later, he returned his "Sitara-i-Imtiaz" medal awarded by the President of Pakistan, protesting his treatment by the martial law authorities after General Zia-ul-Haq seized power in 1977, and was forced to leave the country. He lived many years abroad as an exile and taught at many universities abroad. He began to collect his research material for his many famous books while he was teaching in Germany. His research material was enriched by the experiences he had while living in different countries.

First of all the author has quoted a long list of blunders that are printed in textbooks that are enforced as part of the national curriculum by the government of Pakistan. According to the writer, the textbooks are full of factual errors. In fact, they are just a collection of misquotations, misinterpretations, self-serving and self-supporting statements, one-sided viewpoints, slanted opinions, half-truths and blatant lies.

For example, the textbooks claim that the famous Lahore Resolution or Pakistan Resolution was passed on March 23, 1940 and on the basis of this, March 23 is called the Pakistan Day and is celebrated as a national holiday. The author proves that the resolution that was passed on March 24. Similarly, he says that Pakistan came into being on August 15, 1947, not on August 14, 1947. Furthermore, the author corrects the misinterpreted Allahabad Address of Iqbal. Various textbooks claim that in his address Iqbal demanded a 'separate independent Muslim state', on basis of this argument Iqbal is portrayed as the first person to demand a separate Muslim state in the Indian Subcontinent. The author proves that Iqbal didn't demanded an 'independent state' but merely demanded to unite the Muslim-majority areas of the Subcontinent.[1][2] The author also corrects the textbooks' claim that the Mutiny of 1857 was a War Of Independence headed by Muslims. In doing so, he states that the events of 1857 cannot be regarded as a war of independence, or a collective effort by Indian people against the Imperialism of Britain. Nor it was headed by Muslims.

He also claimed that he was real author of Ishtiaq Hussain Qureshi's book The Struggle for Pakistan. Mr. Qureshi indirectly accepted this fact in his preface to the book, he once said in the 1990s. "However, if were to write this book today, I would write differently."